[RM Ch09] - Adding Observability and Monitoring Section (#2178)
cntt-n/CNTT: doc/ref_model/chapters/chapter09.md

  * [9.5.1 Infrastructure LCM Automation](#9.5.1)
  * [9.5.2 Software Onboarding Automation and CI/CD Requirements](#9.5.2)
  * [9.5.3 Tenant creation automation](#9.5.3)
* [9.6 Telemetry and Observability](#9.6)
  * [9.6.1 Why Observability](#9.6.1)
    * [9.6.1.1 What to observe](#9.6.1.1)
    * [9.6.1.2 What data to collect](#9.6.1.2)
    * [9.6.1.3 Data categories](#9.6.1.3)
    * [9.6.1.4 Where to send the data](#9.6.1.4)
    * [9.6.1.5 Which protocol, interface, and format to use](#9.6.1.5)
  * [9.6.2 The Architecture](#9.6.2)

>     * [9.6.2.1 Push Vs. Pull](#9.6.2.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * [9.6.2.1 Push vs. Pull](#9.6.2.1)
```

<a name="9.5.3.2"></a>
#### 9.5.3.2. Tenant Networking Automation

<a name="9.6"></a>
#### 9.6. Telemetry and Observability

> Operating complex distributed systems, such as Telco network, is a demanding and challenging task, being increased as the production excellence requirement grows. There are multiple reasons why it is so, but they originate in the nature of the system concept. To reach the ability of providing Telco services, a complex system is divided into multiple blocks with functional differences, called network functions. Internal communication between diversity of network functions of a distributed system is based on a message exchange. To formalize it, clearly defined interfaces are introduced, and protocols are being designed. Even though the architecture of Telco network is systematically formalized on the worldwide level, heterogeneity of services, functions, interfaces, and protocols cannot be avoided. By adding the multi-vendor approach in implementation of Telco networks, the outcome is indeed a system with remarkably high level of complexity which requires significant efforts for operating it.

Reviewer 2: Nit picks:
```suggestion
Operating complex distributed systems, such as a Telco network, is a demanding and challenging task, that is continuously being increased as the network complexity and the production excellence requirements grow. There are multiple reasons why it is so, but they originate in the nature of the system concept. To reach the ability of providing Telco services, a complex system is decomposed into multiple different functional blocks, called network functions. Internal communication between the diverse network functions of a distributed system is based on message exchange. To formalize this communication, clearly defined interfaces are introduced, and protocols designed. Even though the architecture of a Telco network is systematically formalized on the worldwide level, heterogeneity of services, functions, interfaces, and protocols cannot be avoided. By adding the multi-vendor approach in implementation of Telco networks, the outcome is indeed a system with remarkably high level of complexity which requires significant efforts for managing and operating it.
```

> To ensure proper support and flawless work in the large ecosystem of end user services, a formalized approach directed towards high reliability and scalability of systems is required. The discipline which applies well known practices of software engineering to operations is called Site Reliability Engineering. It was conceived at Google, as a means to overcome missing limitations of the common DevOps approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ensure proper support and flawless work in the large ecosystem of end user services, a formalized approach directed towards high reliability and scalability of systems is required. The discipline which applies well known practices of software engineering to operations is called Site Reliability Engineering. It was conceived at Google, as a means to overcome limitations of the common DevOps approach.
```

> Common supporting system (OSS – Operation Support System, BSS – Business Support System) requirements are redefined, driven by introduction of new technologies in computing infrastructure; modern data centres with abstraction of resources – known as virtualization and cloud computing. This brings many advantages – such as easy scaling, error recovery, reaching a high level of operational autonomy etc., but also many new challenges in the Telecom network management space. Those novel challenges are mostly directed towards the dynamical nature of the system, orientation towards microservices instead of a silo approach, and huge amounts of data which has to be processed in order to understand the internal status of the system. Hence the need of improved ways to monitor systems - observability.

Reviewer 2: Some thing is missing from this phrase, "modern data centres with abstraction of resources – known as virtualization and cloud computing"

Author: @pgoyal01 - This is fixed

<a name="9.5.3.2"></a>
#### 9.5.3.2. Tenant Networking Automation

<a name="9.6"></a>
## 9.6. Telemetry and Observability

> Operating complex distributed systems, such as a Telco network, is a demanding and challenging task, that is continuously being increased as the network complexity and the production excellence requirements grow. There are multiple reasons why it is so, but they originate in the nature of the system concept. To reach the ability of providing Telco services, a complex system is decomposed into multiple different functional blocks, called network functions. Internal communication between the diverse network functions of a distributed system is based on message exchange. To formalize this communication, clearly defined interfaces are introduced, and protocols designed. Even though the architecture of a Telco network is systematically formalized on the worldwide level, heterogeneity of services, functions, interfaces, and protocols cannot be avoided. By adding the multi-vendor approach in implementation of Telco networks, the outcome is indeed a system with remarkably high level of complexity which requires significant efforts for managing and operating it.

Reviewer 3: @sukhdevkapur This first paragraph concerns the all chapter. I have the feeling that it arrives too late in the chapter. It could be moved to the introduction, as section 9.2 "Configuration and LCM" talks about observed state and section 9.3 "Assurance" is linked to monitoring

Author: @karinesevilla - Are you suggesting that we move section 9.6 relatively higher in the chapter or are you suggesting moving just one paragraph. If latter, then it will probably break the continuity of section 9.6

Reviewer 3: @sukhdevkapur My suggestion was to move the first paragraph only. But if it breaks the text continuity, let it as it is for this release, we can rebalance after Elbrus

Author: @karinesevilla - Yes. Lets keep it together for now. We can always revisit it later

While many Telco Clouds start as a vertical cloud by hosting one prime application, e.g. IMS, the intent is to host more applications over time in order to truly maximize the cloud to its full potential. Therefore it is pure coincidence to have the same team responsible and manage the infrastructure and the application running on top. Network services and applications deployed on a Telco Cloud are managed by separate teams, within the same or different organizations and a monitoring solution must be capable of keeping the collection of monitoring data isolated between tenants and NFVI. At the same time, some monitoring data from the NFVI layer must selectively be available to tenant monitoring applications in order to correlate e.g. VNF metrics with the underlying infrastructure it currently runs on.

<a name="9.6.2"></a>
### 9.6.2. What to Monitor

These physical and virtual devices need to be monitored: 

* Network Services across sites and tenants 							
* Virtualized functions per site and tenant
* Individual Virtual Machines and Containers
* Virtualization infrastructure components
* Physical servers (compute) and network elements

> * Toolservers with their applications (DNS, IdM, ZTP, etc) 

Reviewer 4: "IdM, ZTP" -> "Identity Management, Zero Touch Provisioning".

Author: @petorre I have updated the text per your suggestion

Common supporting system (OSS – Operation Support System, BSS – Business Support System) requirements are redefined, driven by introduction of new technologies in computing infrastructure and modern data centres with abstraction of resources – known as virtualization and cloud computing. This brings many advantages – such as easy scaling, error recovery, reaching a high level of operational autonomy etc., but also many new challenges in the Telecom network management space. Those novel challenges are mostly directed towards the dynamical nature of the system, orientation towards microservices instead of a silo approach, and huge amounts of data which has to be processed in order to understand the internal status of the system. Hence the need of improved ways to monitor systems - observability.

<a name="9.6.1"></a>
### 9.6.1. Why Observability

> Knowing the status of all services and functions at all levels in a cloud based service offering is essential to act fast, ideally pro-actively before users notice and most importantly, before they call the help desk. This requires to collect alarms and telemetry data from the physical layer (wires), the cloud infrastructure up to the network, application and services virtualized functions (VNF) running on top of Cloud Infrastructure, typically isolated by tenants.		

Reviewer 2: nit pick
```suggestion
Knowing the status of all services and functions at all levels in a cloud based service offering is essential to act fast, ideally pro-actively before users notice and, most importantly, before they call the help desk. This requires the collection of alarms and telemetry data from the physical layer (wires), the cloud infrastructure up to the network, application and services virtualized functions (VNF) running on top of Cloud Infrastructure, typically isolated by tenants.
```

Common supporting system (OSS – Operation Support System, BSS – Business Support System) requirements are redefined, driven by introduction of new technologies in computing infrastructure and modern data centres with abstraction of resources – known as virtualization and cloud computing. This brings many advantages – such as easy scaling, error recovery, reaching a high level of operational autonomy etc., but also many new challenges in the Telecom network management space. Those novel challenges are mostly directed towards the dynamical nature of the system, orientation towards microservices instead of a silo approach, and huge amounts of data which has to be processed in order to understand the internal status of the system. Hence the need of improved ways to monitor systems - observability.

<a name="9.6.1"></a>
### 9.6.1. Why Observability

Knowing the status of all services and functions at all levels in a cloud based service offering is essential to act fast, ideally pro-actively before users notice and, most importantly, before they call the help desk. 

> Common approach to understanding aforementioned telecom network status in conventional non-cloud environments is referred to as monitoring. Usually it would include metric information related toresources, such as CPU, memory, HDD, Network I/O, but also business related technical indicators (KPIs) such as number of active users, number of registrations, etc. This monitoring data isrepresented as a time series, retrieved in regular intervals, usually with granulation of 5 to 30 minutes.In addition to it, async messages such as alarms and notifications were exposed by the monitored systems in order to provide information about foreseen situations. It is worth noting that metric data provides approximation of the health of the system, while the alarms and notifications try to bring more information about the problem. In general, they provide information about known unknowns - anticipated situations occurring at random time. However, this would very rarely be sufficient information for understanding the problem (RCA - root cause analysis), therefore it is necessary to retrieve more data related to the problem - logs and network signalization. Logs are application output information created by developers to get more granular information about the code execution. Network packet captures/traces are useful since telecommunication networks are distributed systems where components communicate utilizing various protocols, and the communication can be examined to get details of the problem. The latter two sources of information need manual human analysis in order to extract useful information, and as such are usually not essential parts of the regular monitoring systems.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence, "The latter two sources of information need manual human analysis in order to extract useful information, and as such are usually not essential parts of the regular monitoring systems." is not essentially correct -- there are multiple efforts to create a tracing system, including "[OpenTrace](https://opentracing.io/)".

```suggestion
Common approach to understanding aforementioned telecom network status in conventional non-cloud environments is referred to as monitoring. Usually it would include metric information related to resources, such as CPU, memory, HDD, Network I/O, but also business related technical indicators (KPIs) such as number of active users, number of registrations, etc. This monitoring data is represented as a time series, retrieved in regular intervals, usually with granulation of 5 to 30 minutes. In addition, async messages, such as alarms and notifications, are exposed by the monitored systems in order to provide information about foreseen situations. It is worth noting that metric data provides approximation of the health of the system, while the alarms and notifications try to bring more information about the problem. In general, they provide information about known unknowns - anticipated situations occurring at some random time. However, this would very rarely be sufficient information, such as the context, for understanding the problem (RCA - root cause analysis). Therefore it is necessary to retrieve more data related to the problem - logs and network signalization. Logs are application output information created by developers to trace the code execution flow. Network packet captures/traces are useful since telecommunication networks are distributed systems where components communicate utilizing various protocols, and the communication can be examined to get details of the problem. The latter two sources of information need manual human analysis in order to extract useful information, and as such are usually not essential parts of the regular monitoring systems.
```

Reviewer 5: I was expecting to be challenged on that sentence, but because of something else. :)
So, I was referring to network packet capturing and logs. They are extensively used, but not for "normal" monitoring, rather for deeper investigations in case of problems. OpenTrace is talking about tracing in the sense of tracking distributed requests and responds of the services. But, I would agree that calls can be thought of as set of distributed requests, therefore it could be understood as a "tracing" in the sense provided by OpenTracing project. Anyway, I believe that the statements still holds: such tracing as proposed by OpenTracing is not part of current monitoring solutions (to the best of my knowledge).
I was expecting to be challenged exactly because I am saying that network capturing is not essential part of monitoring, but maybe some of the Telcos do have them deeply integrated.
In order to avoid possible different interpratations, I would change the sentence.

Reviewer 5: As I wanted to propose another sentence, it occured to me that this (last) sentence could be completely removed. I am not sure if would be allowed to make an edit, in the worst case @sukhdevkapur would need to do so.

Author: Removed the last sentence

To ensure proper support and flawless work in the large ecosystem of end user services, a formalized approach directed towards high reliability and scalability of systems is required. The discipline which applies well known practices of software engineering to operations is called Site Reliability Engineering. It was conceived at Google, as a means to overcome limitations of the common DevOps approach.

> Common supporting system (OSS – Operation Support System, BSS – Business Support System) requirements are redefined, driven by introduction of new technologies in computing infrastructure and modern data centres with abstraction of resources – known as virtualization and cloud computing. This brings many advantages – such as easy scaling, error recovery, reaching a high level of operational autonomy etc., but also many new challenges in the Telecom network management space. Those novel challenges are mostly directed towards the dynamical nature of the system, orientation towards microservices instead of a silo approach, and huge amounts of data which has to be processed in order to understand the internal status of the system. Hence the need of improved ways to monitor systems - observability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Common supporting system (OSS – Operation Support System, BSS – Business Support System) requirements are redefined, driven by introduction of new technologies in computing infrastructure and modern data centres with abstraction of resources – known as virtualization and cloud computing. This brings many advantages – such as easy scaling, error recovery, reaching a high level of operational autonomy etc., but also many new challenges in the Telecom network management space. Those novel challenges are mostly directed towards the dynamical nature of the system, orientation towards microservices instead of a silo approach, and huge amounts of data which have to be processed in order to understand the internal status of the system. Hence the need of improved ways to monitor systems - observability.
```

<a name="9.6.1"></a>
### 9.6.1. Why Observability

Knowing the status of all services and functions at all levels in a cloud based service offering is essential to act fast, ideally pro-actively before users notice and, most importantly, before they call the help desk. 

> Common approach to understanding aforementioned telecom network status in conventional non-cloud environments is referred to as monitoring. Usually it would include metric information related toresources, such as CPU, memory, HDD, Network I/O, but also business related technical indicators (KPIs) such as number of active users, number of registrations, etc. This monitoring data isrepresented as a time series, retrieved in regular intervals, usually with granulation of 5 to 30 minutes.In addition to it, async messages such as alarms and notifications were exposed by the monitored systems in order to provide information about foreseen situations. It is worth noting that metric data provides approximation of the health of the system, while the alarms and notifications try to bring more information about the problem. In general, they provide information about known unknowns - anticipated situations occurring at random time. However, this would very rarely be sufficient information for understanding the problem (RCA - root cause analysis), therefore it is necessary to retrieve more data related to the problem - logs and network signalization. Logs are application output information created by developers to get more granular information about the code execution. Network packet captures/traces are useful since telecommunication networks are distributed systems where components communicate utilizing various protocols, and the communication can be examined to get details of the problem. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Common approach to understand the aforementioned Telco network status in conventional non-cloud environments is referred to as monitoring. Usually it would include metric information related to resources, such as CPU, memory, HDD, Network I/O, but also business related technical key performance indicators (KPIs) such as number of active users, number of registrations, etc. This monitoring data are represented as a time series, retrieved in regular intervals, usually with granulation of 5 to 30 minutes. In addition, async messages such as alarms and notifications are exposed by the monitored systems in order to provide information about foreseen situations. It is worth noting that metric data provide approximation of the health of the system, while the alarms and notifications try to bring more information about the problem. In general, they provide information about known unknowns - anticipated situations occurring at random time. However, this would very rarely be sufficient information for understanding the problem (RCA - root cause analysis), therefore it is necessary to retrieve more data related to the problem - logs and network signalization. Logs are application output information to get more granular information about the code execution. Network packet captures/traces are useful since telecommunication networks are distributed systems where components communicate utilizing various protocols, and the communication can be examined to get details of the problem.
```

> As the transition towards cloud environments takes place simultaneously with the introduction of DevOps mindset, conventional monitoring approach becomes suboptimal. Cloud environments allow greater flexibility as the microservice architecture is embraced to bring improvements in operability, therefore the automation can be utilized to much higher extent than ever before. Automation in telecom networks usually supposes actions based on decisions derived from system output data (system observation). In order to derive useful decisions, data with rich context are inevitable. Obviously, conventional monitoring approach has to be improved in order to retrieve sufficient data, not only from the wider context, but also without delays - as soon as data is produced or available. The new enhanced approach was introduced as a concept of observability, borrowed from the control theory which states that it is possible to make conclusions about the system internal state based on the external outputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the transition towards cloud environments takes place simultaneously with the introduction of DevOps mindset, the conventional monitoring approach becomes suboptimal. Cloud environments allow greater flexibility as the microservice architecture is embraced to bring improvements in operability, therefore the automation can be utilized to much higher extent than ever before. Automation in telecom networks usually supposes actions based on decisions derived from system output data (system observation). In order to derive useful decisions, data with rich context are necessary. Obviously, the conventional monitoring approach has to be improved in order to retrieve sufficient data, not only from the wider context, but also without delays - as soon as data are produced or available. The new, enhanced approach was introduced as a concept of observability, borrowed from the control theory which states that it is possible to make conclusions about a system's internal state based on external outputs.
```

> This requires the collection of alarms and telemetry data from the physical layer (wires), the cloud infrastructure up to the network, application and services virtualized functions (VNF) running on top of Cloud Infrastructure, typically isolated by tenants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This requires the collection of alarms and telemetry data from the physical layer (wires), the cloud infrastructure up to the network, applications and services (virtualized network functions (VNF)) running on top of the cloud infrastructure, typically isolated by tenants.
```

Long term trending data are essential for capacity planning purposes and typically collected, aggregated and kept over the full lifespan. To keep the amount of data collected manageable, automatic data reduction algorithms are typically used, e.g. by merging data points from the smallest intervals to more granular intervals.

> A cloud typically consists of one or more regional data centers, central offices, and edge sites. These are managed from redundant central management sites, each hosted in their own data centers.

Reviewer: I think it would be better to say 'telecom infrastructure' here and even that might be forward looking as I don't think today we can generally say that majority of telecom clouds have edge sites. Cloud itself doesn't imply a distributed system and even though this document is targeted for a mainly telco audience I think it's important to distinguish.

Author: Good suggestion - fixed the text

> The network services and applications deployed on a Telco Cloud, and the Telco Cloud infrastructure are usually managed by separate teams, and, thus, the monitoring solution must be capable of keeping the collected monitoring data isolated between tenants and Cloud Infrastructure operations. Some monitoring data from the Cloud Infrastructure layer must selectively be available to tenant monitoring applications in order to correlate, say, the Network Functions/Services data with the underlying cloud infrastructure data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The network services and applications deployed on a telco cloud, and the telco cloud infrastructure are usually managed by separate teams, and, thus, the monitoring solution must be capable of keeping the collected monitoring data isolated between tenants and cloud infrastructure operations. Some monitoring data from the cloud infrastructure layer must selectively be available to tenant monitoring applications in order to correlate, say, the network functions/services data with the underlying cloud infrastructure data.
```

<a name="9.6.1.1"></a>
#### 9.6.1.1. What to observe

Typically, when it comes to data collection, three questions arise:
1. What data to collect?
2. Where to send the data?
3. Which protocol/interface/format to use?

<a name="9.6.1.2"></a>
#### 9.6.1.2. What data to collect

Assessment on what data to collect should start by iterating over the physical and virtual infrastructure components: 

> * Network Services across sites and tenants 							

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Network services across sites and tenants 							
```

* Virtualized functions per site and tenant

> * Individual Virtual Machines and Containers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Individual virtual machines and containers
```

* Virtualization infrastructure components
* Physical servers (compute) and network elements
* Toolservers with their applications (DNS, Identity Management, Zero Touch Provisioning, etc) 
* Cabling 

<a name="9.6.1.3"></a>
#### 9.6.1.3. Data categories

There are four main observability categories: metrics, alarms, logs and traces:

> 1. **Metrics** or telemetry report counters and gauge levels and can either be pulled periodically e.g. via SNMP or REST, or pushed as streams using gRPC, NETCONF, which receivers registered for certain sensors, or by registering as a publisher to a message broker. These messages must be structured in order to get parsed successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Metrics** or telemetry report counters and gauge levels can either be pulled periodically e.g. via SNMP or REST APIs, pushed as streams using gRPC or NETCONF, where receivers registered for certain sensors, or by registering as a publisher to a message broker. These messages must be structured in order to get parsed successfully.
```

2. **Alarms** indicate state variance beyond some specified threshold, are categorized by severity, often with a description of what just

> happened. Most common transport protocol is SNMP with its trap and inform messages). These messages are generated by network elements (physical and logical). In addition, the messages can also be generated by monitoring applications with statically configured thresholds or dynamically by Machine Learning (ML) algorithms - generally, they are describing anomalies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
happened. The most common transport protocol is SNMP (with its trap and inform messages). These messages are generated by network elements (physical and logical). In addition, the messages can also be generated by monitoring applications with statically configured thresholds or dynamically by Machine Learning (ML) algorithms - generally, they are describing anomalies.
```

> 3. **Logs** are a record messages generated by software for most devices (compute and network) and virtual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Logs** are records of messages generated by software for most devices (compute and network) and virtual
```

> applications and transported over SYSLOG and tend to come in high volumes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
applications. They are transported over SYSLOG and tend to come in high volumes.
```

4. **Traces** are end-to-end signalling messages (events) created to fullfil execution of requests on
the distributed system services. OTHER WORDS: Traces are all action points executed in
order to provide response to the request set to the distributed system service. Even the call
can be thought of as a request which starts by INVITE message of the SIP protocol.

<a name="9.6.1.4"></a>
#### 9.6.1.4. Where to send the data

If the observability data have to be sent from their sources (or producers) to specific destinations (or consumers), then this creates high degree of dependency between producers and consumers, and is extremely prone to errors, especially in case of configuration changes. Ideally, the data producers must not be impacted with any change in the data consumers and vice versa.

> This is achieved by decoupling data producers from data consumers through the use of Brokers. The Producers always send their data to the same endpoint - the Broker. While the Consumers register with the Broker for data that is of interest to them and always receive their data from the Broker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is achieved by decoupling data producers from data consumers through the use of Brokers. The Producers always send their data to the same endpoint - the Broker. While the Consumers register with the Broker for data that are of interest to them and always receive their data from the Broker.
```

<a name="9.6.1.5"></a>
#### 9.6.1.5. Which protocol, interface, and format to use

While protocols and interfaces are dictated by the selection of the message broker (common data bus) system, data format is usually customizable according to the needs of users. The concept of Schema Registry mechanism, well known in the world of big data, is helpful here to make sure that message structures and formats are consistently used.

<a name="9.6.2"></a>
### 9.6.2. The Architecture

> In geographically dispersed large cloud deployments, a given telco cloud may have several cloud infrastructure components as well a large set of virtualized workloads (VNF/CNFs). It is important to monitor all of these workloads and infrastructure components. Furthermore, it is even more important to be able to correlate between the metrics provided by these entities to determine the performance and/or issues in such deployments. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In geographically dispersed large cloud deployments, a given telco cloud may have several cloud infrastructure components as well as a large set of virtualized workloads (VNF/CNFs). It is important to monitor all of these workloads and infrastructure components. Furthermore, it is even more important to be able to correlate between the metrics provided by these entities to determine the performance and/or issues in such deployments. 
```

> The cloud deployment tends to shrink and expand based upon the customer demand. Therefore, an architecture is required that can scale on demand and does not force a strong tie between various entities. This means, the workloads and cloud infrastructure components that provide telemetry/performance metrics must not be burdened to discover each other. The capacity (e.g. speed, storage) of one component must not force overrun or underrun situations that would cause critical data to be lost or delayed to a point to render it useless. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cloud deployment tends to shrink and expand based upon the customer demand. Therefore, an architecture is required that can scale on demand and does not force a strong tie between various entities. This means, the workloads and cloud infrastructure components that provide telemetry and performance metrics must not be burdened to discover each other. The capacity (e.g. speed, storage) of one component must not force overrun or underrun situations that would cause critical data to be lost or delayed to a point to render them useless. 
```

> Operators in charge of the Cloud Infrastructure (physical infra plus virtualization platform) require very detailed alarms and metrics to efficiently run their platform. While they need indicators about how well or poorly individual virtual machines and containers run, they don’t need a view inside these workloads. In fact, what and how workloads do is none of the NFVI operators business. The architecture must allow for different consumers to grant or deny access to available resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operators in charge of the cloud infrastructure (physical infra plus virtualization platform) require very detailed alarms and metrics to efficiently run their platform. While they need indicators about how well or poorly individual virtual machines and containers run, they don’t need a view inside these workloads. In fact, what and how workloads do should not be accessible to NFVI operators. The architecture must allow for different consumers to grant or deny access to available resources.
```

Multiple workloads or network services can be deployed onto one or more sites. These workloads require logical separation so that their metrics don’t mix by accident or simply based on security and privacy requirements. This is achieved by deploying these workloads within their own tenant space. All virtualization platforms offer such isolation down to virtual networks per tenant.

<a name="9.6.2.1"></a>
#### 9.6.2.1. Push Vs. Pull

Two widely deployed models for providing telemetry data are pull and push. 

 <a name="9.6.2.1.1"></a>
##### 9.6.2.1.1. Pull Model

Typical characteristics of a pull model are:

* The consumers are required to discover the producers of the data

> * Once the producers are identified, there should be a tight relationship (synchronization) between the producer and consumer. For example, if a producer encounters a LCM (Life Cycle Management) event - such as it moves to a different location or reboots/restarts, the consumer must re-discover it and bind the relationship again - makes the systems very complex in terms of configuration as well management. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Once the producers are identified, there should be a tight relationship (synchronization) between the producer and consumer. For example, if a producer encounters a LCM (Life Cycle Management) event - such as it moves to a different location or reboots/restarts, the consumer must re-discover it and bind the relationship again - makes the systems very complex in terms of configuration and management. 
```

> * Data is pulled explicitly by the consumer. The consumer must have appropriate bandwidth, compute power, and storage to deal with this data - example SNMP pull/walks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Data are pulled explicitly by the consumer. The consumer must have appropriate bandwidth, compute power, and storage to deal with this data - example SNMP pull/walks
```

<a name="9.6.1.1"></a>
#### 9.6.1.1. What to observe

Typically, when it comes to data collection, three questions arise:
1. What data to collect?
2. Where to send the data?
3. Which protocol/interface/format to use?

<a name="9.6.1.2"></a>
#### 9.6.1.2. What data to collect

Assessment on what data to collect should start by iterating over the physical and virtual infrastructure components: 

* Network Services across sites and tenants 							
* Virtualized functions per site and tenant
* Individual Virtual Machines and Containers
* Virtualization infrastructure components
* Physical servers (compute) and network elements
* Toolservers with their applications (DNS, Identity Management, Zero Touch Provisioning, etc) 
* Cabling 

<a name="9.6.1.3"></a>
#### 9.6.1.3. Data categories

> There are three main observability categories: metrics, alarms and logs:

Reviewer 2: Per @TFredberg 
```suggestion
There are four main observability categories: metrics, alarms, logs and traces:
```

3. **Logs** are a record messages generated by software for most devices (compute and network) and virtual
applications and transported over SYSLOG and tend to come in high volumes.

4. **Traces** are end-to-end signalling messages (events) created to fullfil execution of requests on
the distributed system services. OTHER WORDS: Traces are all action points executed in
order to provide response to the request set to the distributed system service. Even the call
can be thought of as a request which starts by INVITE message of the SIP protocol.

<a name="9.6.1.4"></a>
#### 9.6.1.4. Where to send the data

If the observability data have to be sent from their sources (or producers) to specific destinations (or consumers), then this creates high degree of dependency between producers and consumers, and is extremely prone to errors, especially in case of configuration changes. Ideally, the data producers must not be impacted with any change in the data consumers and vice versa.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This requires the collection of alarms and telemetry data from the physical layer (wires), the cloud infrastructure up to the network, application and services virtualized functions (VNF) running on top of Cloud Infrastructure, typically isolated by tenants.

Long term trending data are essential for capacity planning purposes and typically collected, aggregated and kept over the full lifespan. To keep the amount of data collected manageable, automatic data reduction algorithms are typically used, e.g. by merging data points from the smallest intervals to more granular intervals.

A cloud typically consists of one or more regional data centers, central offices, and edge sites. These are managed from redundant central management sites, each hosted in their own data centers.

> While many Telco Clouds start as a vertical cloud by hosting one prime application, e.g. IMS, the intent is to host more applications over time in order to truly maximize the cloud to its full potential. Therefore it is pure coincidence to have the same team responsible and manage the infrastructure and the application running on top. Network services and applications deployed on a Telco Cloud are managed by separate teams, within the same or different organizations and a monitoring solution must be capable of keeping the collection of monitoring data isolated between tenants and NFVI. At the same time, some monitoring data from the NFVI layer must selectively be available to tenant monitoring applications in order to correlate e.g. VNF metrics with the underlying infrastructure it currently runs on.

Reviewer 2: Would it be a cloud (as per NIST definition) if it were only hosting a single application - there would be no resource pooling, etc.?

```suggestion
The network services and applications deployed on a Telco Cloud, and the Telco Cloud infrastructure are usually managed by separate teams, and, thus, the monitoring solution must be capable of keeping the collected monitoring data isolated between tenants and Cloud Infrastructure operations. Some monitoring data from the Cloud Infrastructure layer must selectively be available to tenant monitoring applications in order to correlate, say, the Network Functions/Services data with the underlying cloud infrastructure data.
```

> While many Telco Clouds start as a vertical cloud by hosting one prime application, e.g. IMS, the intent is to host more applications over time in order to truly maximize the cloud to its full potential. Therefore it is pure coincidence to have the same team responsible and manage the infrastructure and the application running on top. Network services and applications deployed on a Telco Cloud are managed by separate teams, within the same or different organizations and a monitoring solution must be capable of keeping the collection of monitoring data isolated between tenants and NFVI. At the same time, some monitoring data from the NFVI layer must selectively be available to tenant monitoring applications in order to correlate e.g. VNF metrics with the underlying infrastructure it currently runs on.

Reviewer 6: `Network services and applications deployed on a Telco Cloud are managed by separate teams, within the same or different organizations and a monitoring solution must be capable of keeping the collection of monitoring data isolated between tenants and NFVI.`

The data do not have to be collected separately, but the access to collected data has to be controlled enabling Tenants and other operational entities access to the data they need and have authority to access.

Author: Fixed the text

<a name="9.6.1.1"></a>

> #### 9.6.1.1. What to observe

Reviewer 6: Suggest a small restructuring with initial text and the bulleted list with 3 items under What to observe, followed by 3 sub chapters (not 4) describing each of the 3 bullets.
What data to collect and Data categories could be merged under the same heading.

Author: Restructuring done

Typically, when it comes to data collection, three questions arise:

> 1. Which data to collect?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. What data to collect?
```

2. Where to send the data?
3. Which protocol/interface/format to use?

<a name="9.6.1.2"></a>
#### 9.6.1.2. What data to collect

> Assessment on which data to collect should start by iterating over the physical and virtual infrastructure components: 

Reviewer 2: nit -- "which" implies that there are some possible choices? 
```suggestion
Assessment on what data to collect should start by iterating over the physical and virtual infrastructure components: 
```

Reviewer 5: Yes; I was guided by this approach https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/121706/what-data-or-which-data 
From my perspective it is finite set of data types that can be retrieved. If we take a look on different level in terms of possibilty to specify each possible message, then it is not finite set. Therefore, I would accept proposal to continue with "what data".

* Network Services across sites and tenants 							
* Virtualized functions per site and tenant
* Individual Virtual Machines and Containers
* Virtualization infrastructure components
* Physical servers (compute) and network elements
* Toolservers with their applications (DNS, Identity Management, Zero Touch Provisioning, etc) 
* Cabling 

<a name="9.6.1.3"></a>
#### 9.6.1.3. Data categories

> There are three main observability categories: metrics, alarms and logs:

Reviewer 6: The list of 4 items below describe Traces as well, so I suggest this headline in some way include if that should be seen as a fourth main observability or break out the Traces into another category.
I agree on all 4 items, but also that Traces are more a higher level combined observability.

Author: Removed heading from Data Categories

> 1. **Metrics** or telemetry report counters and gauge levels and can either be pulled periodically e.g. via SNMP or REST, or pushed as streams using gRPC, NETCONF, which receivers registered for certain sensors, or by registering as a publisher to a Kafka bus. These messages must be structured in order to get parsed successfully.

Reviewer 2: This assumes that Kafka is used -- not stated earlier. Should this be generalised?

Reviewer 5: Discrepancy comes from having two authors; I myself would prefer to stay generic without mentioning Kafka. If @sukhdevkapur has no objections, I would switch it to "message broker" instead of "Kafka bus".

Reviewer 6: No, RM shall be technology independent.
But architectural constructs with Message Buses should be OK.

Author: Fixed - replaced Kafka bus with message broker

> 2. **Alarms** indicate state changes, categorized by severity, often with a description of what just

Reviewer 2: Alarms are not generated for every state change but for state variance beyond some threshold(s).

 ```suggestion
2. **Alarms** indicate state variance beyond some specified threshold, are categorized by severity, often with a description of what just
```

Reviewer 5: This is one example where I would prefer to go very deep in discussion. First, I would try to differentiate events from alarms. Then I would like to formally describe - maybe even find appropriate terminology - for alarm messages generated by the applications (which do not have to be derived from metrics neccessarily!) and those "alerts" created from metrics. In the latter case, it does not have to alert based on variance, but in case of using i.e. supervised machine learning, it could be recognition of learned metric sequence.
Anyway, I would agree with the change (@sukhdevkapur hopefully as well), and stating right now that we should give much deeper thought on this in the future.

> 2. **Alarms** indicate state changes, categorized by severity, often with a description of what just

Reviewer 6: I feel the label Alarm here is trying to describe both the nature of how the observability could be done and the severity of that observation. I would rather categorize this group as Events and not Alarms. These Events are generally asynchronous and could in some cases have different levels of severity attached to them e.g. Alerts and Alarms if the wanted action from the Event consumer is known.

Author: Changed Alarms to Events

> hap- pened. Most common transport protocol is SNMP (traps and inform messages). They

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
happened. Most common transport protocol is SNMP with its trap and inform messages. These messages
```

Author: @pgoyal01 - fixed this

> are generated by physical network elements as well as logical devices. In addition, they can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are generated by network elements (physical and logical). In addition, the messages can
```

Author: Fixed

> also be generated by monitoring applications in form of configured thresholds or dynamic by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
also be generated by monitoring applications with statically configured thresholds or dynamically by
```

Author: Fixed

> means of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms - generally, they are describing anomalies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms. Simply, alarms are alerts f anomalies in system behaviour.
```

Author: Fixed

> 3. **Logs** messages are generated by most physical devices (compute and network) and virtual

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Logs** are a record of messages generated by software for most devices (compute and network) and
```

Author: Fixed

applications and transported over SYSLOG and tend to come in high volumes.

4. **Traces** are end-to-end signalling messages (events) created to fullfil execution of requests on
the distributed system services. OTHER WORDS: Traces are all action points executed in
order to provide response to the request set to the distributed system service. Even the call
can be thought of as a request which starts by INVITE message of the SIP protocol.

<a name="9.6.1.4"></a>
#### 9.6.1.4. Where to send the data

> If the sources of observability data have to send their data towards particular specific destinations, then it is a concept with high dependency and extremely prone to errors, especially in case of configuration changes. In order to keep it clean and elegant, data sources should be completely independent of the data receivers; i.e. data sources must not be impacted with any change in the data receivers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the observability data have to be sent from their sources (or Producers) to specific destinations (or Consumers), then this creates a high degree of dependency between Producers and Consumers, and is extremely prone to errors, especially in case of configuration changes. Ideally, the data Producers must not be impacted with any change in the data Consumers and vice versa.
```

Reviewer 5: Thanks, this sounds much more elegant and clear! I would accept copletely.

Author: Fixed

> 

Reviewer 2: Delete this blank line

Author: Fixed

> Ideally, observability data would be sent from the source systems always to the same destination. This is achieved by using message brokers to decouple data producers from data consumers, and that inherently means that sources send data always to the same point. It is worth noting that message brokers can be considered as a common data bus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is achieved by decoupling data producers from data consumers through the use of Brokers. The Producers always send their data always to the same endpoint - the Broker. While the Consumers register with the Broker for data that is of interest to them and always receive their data from the Broker.
```

Reviewer 5: "always" duplicated in "Producers always send their data always". "While" in last sentence maybe suggests that there will be consequence stated in the same sentence, like "while something, then other thing".

<a name="9.6.1.5"></a>
#### 9.6.1.5. Which protocol, interface, and format to use

> While protocols and interfaces are dictated by the selection of the message broker (common data bus) system, data format is usually customizable according to the needs of users. The concept of Schema Registry mechanism, well known in the world of big data, is helpful here to make sure that message structures and formats are consistently used.

Reviewer 2: Can't a broker support multiple interfaces and input and output data formats including data conversion from one format to another?

Reviewer 5: The idea was to say that if we use Kafka, then we cannot use i.e. syslog or snmp as a protocol. Neither we can use interfaces used between syslog or snmp. If Kafka is used, then we have to use interface of Kafka enpoint as well as the protocol for sending Kafka messages.

Author: Generally a data conversion component will be needed (e.g through a side car)

Operators in charge of the Cloud Infrastructure (physical infra plus virtualization platform) require very detailed alarms and metrics to efficiently run their platform. While they need indicators about how well or poorly individual virtual machines and containers run, they don’t need a view inside these workloads. In fact, what and how workloads do is none of the NFVI operators business. The architecture must allow for different consumers to grant or deny access to available resources.

Multiple workloads or network services can be deployed onto one or more sites. These workloads require logical separation so that their metrics don’t mix by accident or simply based on security and privacy requirements. This is achieved by deploying these workloads within their own tenant space. All virtualization platforms offer such isolation down to virtual networks per tenant.

<a name="9.6.2.1"></a>

> #### 9.6.2.1. Push Vs. Pull

Reviewer 6: I would suggest to describe Push, Pull and Brokering as 3 different methods or architectural constructs.
Now Push is mostly describing Brokering which in reality is a combination of services offering both Push and Pull and an architecture that normally combines the best of the two basic methods allowing independence in between producers and consumers.

Author: @TFredberg - Push and Pull are the methods (or techniques) where as brokering is facilitating component. The very next section does talk about message broker

Two widely deployed models for providing telemetry data are pull and push. 

 <a name="9.6.2.1.1"></a>
##### 9.6.2.1.1. Pull Model

Typical characteristics of a pull model are:

> * The consumers are required to discover the producers of the data

Reviewer 2: Not in a Broker service?

Author: Broker is fixed known endpoint and it is not a producer

> * Once the producers are identified, there should be a tight relationship (synchronization) between the producer and consumer. For example, if a producer encounters a LCM (Life Cycle Management) event - such as it moves to a different location or reboots/restarts, the consumer must re-discover it and bind the relationship again - makes the systems very complex in terms of configuration as well management. 

Reviewer 6: Complex sentence that is hard to decode.

Author: Fixed the sentence

* Data is pulled explicitly by the consumer. The consumer must have appropriate bandwidth, compute power, and storage to deal with this data - example SNMP pull/walks

> 

Reviewer 6: Another problem with Pull is that both consumers and producers have to have means for load/performance regulation in cases where the set of consumers overload the pull request serving capabilities of the producer.

Author: Good suggestion. Added to the text
